Speculative Decoding for Whisper (#1704)
huggingface/blog: whisper-spec-dec.md

While the transcription accuracy is exceptional, the inference time is very slow. A 1 hour audio clip takes upwards of 
6 minutes to transcribe on a 16GB T4 GPU, even after leveraging inference optimisations like [flash attention](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/perf_infer_gpu_one#flashattention-2), 
half-precision and chunking.

In this blog post, we demonstrate how Speculative Decoding can be employed to reduce the 
inference time of Whisper by a **factor of 2**, while mathematically ensuring exactly the **same outputs** are achieved 
from the model. As a result, this method provides a perfect drop-in replacement for existing Whisper pipelines, since it 
provides free 2x speed-up while maintaining the same accuracy. For a more streamlined version of the blog post 
with fewer explanations but all the code, see the accompanying [Google Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/github/sanchit-gandhi/notebooks/blob/main/speculative_decoding.ipynb).

## Speculative Decoding

Speculative Decoding was proposed in the paper [Fast Inference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.17192) 

> by Yaniv Leviathan et. al. from Google. It works on the premise that a faster, **assistant model** can be used to 
> boostrap the generation of a larger, **main model**.

Reviewer: Don't like the word "bootstrap" here too much - I understand bootstrap more as "getting oneself to a level without external help" 

Maybe something like:
```suggestion
by Yaniv Leviathan et. al. from Google. It works on the premise that a faster, **assistant model** very often generates the same tokens as a larger **main model**.
```

> First, the assistant model auto-regressively generates a sequence of \\( N \\) *candidate tokens*, \\( \hat{\boldsymbol{y}}_{1:N} \\). 

Author: I've used it previously with success, e.g. as per https://huggingface.co/blog/audioldm2#model-overview

> First, the assistant model auto-regressively generates a sequence of \\( N \\) *candidate tokens*, \\( \hat{\boldsymbol{y}}_{1:N} \\). 

Reviewer 2: You are right, I forgot about the double-backslash syntax! I got confused by this PR that reverted the usual `$` delimiter: https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/1708/files

Sorry!

> First, the assistant model auto-regressively generates a sequence of \\( N \\) *candidate tokens*, \\( \hat{\boldsymbol{y}}_{1:N} \\). 

Author: No worries! I've also used the `$` syntax by mistake previously and had to fix blog posts 😅

        style="max-width: 70%; margin: auto;"
        controls playsinline
        src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/whisper-spec-dec/split_3.mp4"
    ></video>
</figure>

The inference process then repeats, the assistant model generating a new set of \\( N \\) candidate tokens, which are verified 
in a single forward pass by the main model.

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
    <video
        style="max-width: 70%; margin: auto;"
        controls playsinline
        src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/whisper-spec-dec/split_4.mp4"
    ></video>
</figure>

Since we auto-regressively generate using the fast, assistant model, and only perform verification forward passes with 
the slow, main model, the decoding process is sped-up substantially. Furthermore, the verification forward passes 
performed by the main model ensure that **exactly the same outputs** are achieved as using the main model standalone. 
This makes speculative decoding the perfect substitute to existing Whisper pipelines, since one can be certain that the 
same performance will be attained.

> To get the biggest speed-up in latency, we want the assistant model to be as fast as possible, while predicting the same 
> token distribution as the main model. In practice, these two attributes form a trade-off: the faster the model is, the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the biggest speed-up in latency, we want the assistant model to be significantly faster than the main model, while predicting a
token distribution that is very close to the main model for most (mainly the "easier") tokens. In practice, these two attributes form a trade-off: the faster the model is, the 
```

less accurate it is. The only constraint for selecting an assistant model is that it must share the same vocabulary as 
the main model. That is to say, if we want to use speculative decoding with Whisper [large-v2](https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v2) 
(multilingual), we need to select a multilingual variant of Whisper. Whereas if we want to use speculative decoding with 
Whisper [medium.en](https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-medium.en) (English-only), we need an English-only variant of 
Whisper. At the current time, Whisper [large-v3](https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v3) is an exception, since 
it is the only Whisper checkpoint with an expanded vocabulary size, and thus is not compatible with previous Whisper 

> checkpoints.

Reviewer: 2 comments here:

- 1.) I think we need to say clearly once before that the tokenizer has to match exactly. It's said implicitly by stating that v2 has to use a multi-lingual model but it's not really said why this is the case.

- 2.) I would maybe not phrase speculative decoding as finding the best trade-off between matching the teacher distribution and being fast. While this is certainly correct, the trade-off is very heavily biased towards finding a model that is much faster. E.g. for whisper-large, the by far best student model is whisper-tiny even though the distribution doesn't match much anymore. 
=> So I'd rather phrase it a bit as "The student model has to be at least 3x faster (the more the better) all the while being able to predict the same token distribution as often as possible. (the key here is that the student model gets all the "easy" ones right as in pretty much all sentences 70-80% of predicted tokens are very "easy"

Author: Great points! The first is covered somewhat here: 

> The only constraint for selecting an assistant model is that it must share the same vocabulary as 
the main model.

But I've amended it to make it more clear. I've also addressed the second point in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/1704/commits/83a3a9e6192ff151ff74a85981dc9ef9afde1614

)

assistant_model.to(device);
```

For our benchmarking dataset, we'll load 73 samples from the Dutch ("nl") split of the [VoxPopuli](https://huggingface.co/datasets/facebook/voxpopuli) dataset:

```python
dataset = load_dataset("sanchit-gandhi/voxpopuli_dummy", "nl", split="validation")
```

Great! We can now re-run our benchmark for our baseline Whisper large-v2 model as before. The only change we make is that 
we pass the language and task arguments to our generate function, in order to ensure we perform speech transcription 
(not speech translation). Note that speculative decoding is fully compatible with the speech translation task. Simply 
set the task argument as required below:

```python
all_time = 0
predictions = []
references = []

for sample in tqdm(dataset):
    audio = sample["audio"]
    inputs = processor(audio["array"], sampling_rate=audio["sampling_rate"], return_tensors="pt")
    inputs = inputs.to(device=device, dtype=torch.float16)
    
    output, gen_time = generate_with_time(model, inputs, language="nl", task="transcribe")
    all_time += gen_time
    predictions.append(processor.batch_decode(output, skip_special_tokens=True, normalize=True)[0])

>     references.append(processor.tokenizer._normalize(sample["normalized_text"]))

Author: Opened a PR to make the method public here: https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/28136#issue-2048467063

Otherwise we can instantiate the normalizer separately, but this is a bit more convoluted

    inputs = inputs.to(device=device, dtype=torch.float16)

    output, gen_time = assisted_generate_with_time(model, inputs, language="nl", task="transcribe")
    all_time += gen_time
    predictions.append(processor.batch_decode(output, skip_special_tokens=True, normalize=True)[0])
    references.append(processor.tokenizer._normalize(sample["normalized_text"]))

wer_result = wer.compute(predictions=predictions, references=references)

print("Time:", all_time)
print("WER:", wer_result)
```
**Outputs:**
```
100%|██████████| 73/73 [01:08<00:00,  1.06it/s]
Time: 62.10229682922363
WER: 0.127190136275146
```

Again, we achieve 12.8% WER, but this time in just 62 seconds of inference time, representing a speed-up of 1.9x.
Given the low overhead of loading the assistant model and the mathematical property that exactly the same outputs are 
achieved, speculative decoding offers the perfect drop-in replacement to existing Whisper pipelines.

## Strategies for Efficient Speculative Decoding

In this final section, we cover two strategies for ensuring the fastest possible inference time with speculative decoding.

#### Assistant Model

> Our objective is to select an assistant model that is both fast **and** maintains the same token distribution as the 

Author: Resolved in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/1704/commits/83a3a9e6192ff151ff74a85981dc9ef9afde1614

Whisper models of different sizes, and use one as the assistant to the other:

* First, fine-tune Whisper [large-v3](https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v3) to act as your main model
* Second, distil Whisper [large-v3](https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v3) on the same dataset to act as a fast assistant model

Fine-tuning and distillation can improve the WER performance of both the main and assistant model on your chosen language, 
while maximising the alignment in the token distributions. A complete guide to Whisper fine-tuning can be found 
[here](https://huggingface.co/blog/fine-tune-whisper), and distillation [here](https://github.com/huggingface/distil-whisper/tree/main/training).

#### Batch Size

It is worth noting that the largest speed gains with speculative decoding come with a batch size of 1. For batched 
speculative decoding, all candidate tokens **across the batch** must match the validation tokens in order for the tokens 
to be accepted. If a token in the batch at a given position does not agree, all candidate tokens that proceed the position 

> are discarded. Consequently, speculative decoding favours lower batch sizes. In practice, we find that speculative decoding 

Reviewer 2: Interesting! I fail to visualize why we can't accept irregular sequences, I'll look at the code to get a better understanding.
